75th – 78th akṣaya: Dharmoddāna

75th – 78th Imperishable: Summaries of Religion.


btsun pa śa ra dva ti’i bu, gźan yaṅ byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi chos kyi mdo bźi mi zad pa ste.

punar aparaṃ, bhadanta śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvānāṃ catvāri dharmoddānāny apy akṣayāṇi.

Further, reverend Śāradvatīputra, the bodhisattvas’ four summaries of religion are also imperishable.

ston pa’i byaṅ chub sems dpa’ ni ’du byed thams cad kyi mtshan ñid śes pa daṅ, zag pa daṅ bcas pa thams cad kyi mtshan ñid śes pa daṅ, chos thams cad kyi mtshan ñid śes pa daṅ, źi ba’i ṅa rgyal med pa ste, de’i dbaṅ du byas nas btsun pa śa ra dva ti’i bu gźan yaṅ byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi chos kyi mdo bźi mi zad pa ste źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs te, de dag gi bsdus pa’i don de thob pa rnam par gźag pa bstan to. chos kyi mdo źes bya ba ni ’dus byas daṅ ’dus ma byas kyi chos rnams mi rtag pa la sogs pa ’di bźi mdor bsdus te bstan pa’i phyir chos kyi mdo źes bya’o – "As for the teaching (anuśāsaka) bodhisattva, he is 1) knowing the essential character of all conditioned things (sarvasaṃskāralakṣaṇajña), 2) knowing the essential character of all sullied things (sarvasāsravalakṣaṇajña), 3) knowing the essential character of all moments of existence (sarvadharmalakṣaṇajña), and 4) free of conceit caused by peace (śāntinirmāṇa); with reference to him (tam adhipatiṃ kṛtvā) it is said: ...; as a summarizing title (piṇḍārtha) it is taught as Defining the Attainment of That (tatprāptivyavasthāpanā). They are called Summaries of Religion (dharmoddāna) since they teach these four statements concerned with the impermanence, etc., of all conditioned (saṃskṛta) and unconditioned (asaṃskṛta) moments of existence in a condensed way (samāsanirdeśatas).
mi zad pa ni des bsdu bar bya ba’i ’dus byas daṅ ’dus ma byas kyi chos zad mi śes pas na mi zad pa źes bya’o – "As for imperishability, since the conditioned and unconditioned moments of existence which they are to summarize are imperishable, they are imperishable".
’dir yaṅ bstan pa daṅ bśad pa’i tshul du rig par bya ste, bźi gaṅ źe na? ’di lta ste źes bya ba nas brtsams te mi zad pa’i śes pa rab tu ’jug pa’o źes bya ba yan chad ni bstan pa’i tshul lo, de man chad lhag ma rnams ni bśad pa’i tshul lo.
’du byed thams cad mi rtag par byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyis bstan mi zad pa’i śes pa rab tu ’jug pa źes bya ba ni ’du byed thams cad mi rtag pa’o źes byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyis bstan pa’i śes pa ’byuṅ ste, mi zad pa yin no źes bya ba’i don te, de mi zad pa yaṅ ’du byed kyi chos rnams mi zad pa’i phyir, de bstan pa’am śes pa yaṅ mi zad pa ste, de bźin du sdug bsṅal la sogs pa ’og ma rnams la yaṅ sbyar ro.


bźi gaṅ źe na?

katamāni catvāri?

What four?


’di lta ste: 1) ’du byed thams cad mi rtag par byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi bstan pa mi zad pa’i śes pa rab tu ’jug pa daṅ;2) ’du byed thams cad sdug bsṅal bar byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi bstan pa mi zad pa’i śes pa rab tu ’jug pa daṅ;3) chos thams cad bdag med par byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi bstan pa mi zad pa’i śes pa rab tu ’jug pa daṅ;4) mya ṅan las ’das pa źi bar byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi bstan pa mi zad pa’i śes pa ’jug pa’o.

tad yathānityāḥ sarvasaṃskārā iti bodhisattvānām akṣayanirdeśajñānapraveśaḥ;duḥkhāḥ sarvasaṃskārā iti bodhisattvānām akṣayanirdeśajñānapraveśaḥ;anātmānaḥ sarvadharmā iti bodhisattvānām akṣayanirdeśajñānapraveśaḥ;śāntaṃ nirvāṇam iti bodhisattvānām akṣayanirdeśajñānapraveśaḥ.

1) Entering the knowledge of the bodhisattvas’ imperishable teaching that all conditioned things are impermanent;2) entering the knowledge of the bodhisattvas’ imperishable teaching that all conditioned things are suffering;3) entering the knowledge of the bodhisattvas’ imperishable teaching that all moments of existence are selfless;and 4) entering the knowledge of the bodhisattvas’ imperishable teaching that extinction is peace.




de la mi rtag pa’i don gaṅ źe na?

tatra katamad anityārthaḥ?

1) What then does ’impermanent’ refer to?

’du byed thams cad kyi mtshan ñid śes pa bstan pa’i dbaṅ du byas nas de la mi rtag pa’i don gaṅ źe na źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs so – "With reference to the teaching on the one who knows the essential character of all conditioned things (sarvasaṃskāralakṣaṇajñanirdeśam adhipatiṃ kṛtvā), it is said ...


med pa’i don daṅ, mi chags pa’i don te; dṅos po rnam par ’jig pa’i don ni ma yin no.mi rtag pa’i don ni chos la bdag med pa ste; ṅo bo ñid kyis dben pa’i phyir de la rnam par ’jig pa gaṅ yaṅ med de;

abhavārtho ’saṅgārtho na tu bhavavināśārthaḥ;anityārtho hi dharmanairātmyaḥ, tatra nāsti vināśaḥ kaścana svabhāvaviviktatvāt.

It [impermanent as here intended] refers to non-existence [that all moments of existence are empty (śūnya),according to highest truth (paramārthatas) there is no state of permanence (nityabhāva) in any moment of existence (dharma) imagined as subject and object (grāhyagrāhakaparikalpita)]and non-attachment [as there is no existent substance (bhava) as “me” and “mine”, etc. (ātmâtmīya) to be attached to],not the disappearance of something existent [not that something exists and then does not exist when it has disappeared, but rather that things are essentially not permanent, that is, originally non-existent];impermanent refers to the absence of self in all moments of existence and there [in that emptiness (śūnyatā), being permanently empty (nityaśūnya) ] there is no disappearance as it is [always (nityam) ] apart from any essential existence [of subject and object (grāhyagrāhaka) ].

mi rtag pa’i don yaṅ rnam pa gñis te, med pa’i don daṅ ’jig pa’i don to. ’dir ni chos thams cad stoṅ pa yin par dgoṅs pas med pa’i don la mi rtag pa’i don du dgoṅs kyi, ’jig pa’i don du ma yin te, de bas na med pa’i don daṅ mi chags pa’i don te dṅos po rnam par ’jig pa’i don ni ma yin no źes gsuṅs so. "The content of the word ‘non-existence’ is the content of the word ‘impermanence’" etc.de la med pa’i don ni don dam par gzuṅ ba daṅ ’dzin pa kun brtags kyi chos gaṅ yaṅ rtag tu yod pa ma yin pa’i phyir med pa ste, de ni mi rtag pa’i don to.mi chags pa’i don ni bdag daṅ bdag gi źes bya ba la sogs pa chags par ’gyur ba’i dṅos po gaṅ yaṅ med pa’i phyir mi chags pa ste, de ni mi rtag pa’i don to.de bas na dṅos po ’jig pa’i don ni ma yin no źes dṅos su gsuṅs te, ’jig rten pa’i mi rtag par grags pa daṅ dṅos po yod pa las źig ste med par ’gyur ba las mi rtag ces bya ba ma yin gyi, ye nas raṅ bźin gyis rtag pa med pa la mi rtag pa źes bya’o.don de ñid gaṅ yin pa bstan pa’i phyir mi rtag pa’i don ni chos la bdag med ces bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs te, phuṅ po daṅ khams la sogs pa’i chos rnams la ṅo bo med pa ñid mi rtag pa’i don te, chos la bdag med pa de rtag tu gzuṅ ba daṅ ’dzin pa’i ṅo bo ñid kyis dben pa’i phyir stoṅ pa de la ’jig pa gaṅ yaṅ med de, gaṅ ’jig pa med ciṅ rtag tu stoṅ pa de ni mi rtag pa’i don to.


’di ni mi rtag pa’i don to.

ayam anityārthaḥ.

This is what ’impermanent’ refers to.


de la sdug bsṅal gyi don gaṅ źe na?

tatra katamo duḥkhārthaḥ?

2) What then does ’suffering’ refer to?

zag pa daṅ bcas pa thams cad kyi mtshan ñid śes pa bstan pa’i dbaṅ du byas nas de la sdug bsṅal gyi don gaṅ źe na źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs so – "With reference to the teaching on the one who knows the essential character of all sullied things (sarvasāsravalakṣaṇajñanirdeśam adhipatiṃ kṛtvā) it is said ...
sdug bsṅal gyi don kyaṅ rnam pa lṅa ste, 1) dga’ ba las bzlog pa’i don daṅ, 2) dga’ ba daṅ bral ba’i don daṅ, 3) dga’ ba’i yul ma yin pa’i don daṅ, 4) sgra tsam du zad pa’i don daṅ, 5) raṅ bźin gyis stoṅ pa’i don to.


dga’ ba med pa’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to;dga’ ba zad pa’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to;smon pa med pa’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to;sdug bsṅal gyi sgra rab tu bstan pa’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to;nam mkha’ rab tu brjod pa’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don te;

aratyartho duḥkhārthaḥ,ratikṣayārtho duḥkhārthaḥ,apraṇihitārtho duḥkhārthaḥ,duḥkhaśabdaprakāśanārtho duḥkhārthaḥ,ākāśaprabhāvanārtho duḥkhārthaḥ.

Suffering refers to absence of joy;joy perishing is what suffering refers to,that there is nothing to long for is what suffering refers to,explaining the word suffering is what suffering refers to [it perishes being only a word, saying the word suffering perishes in suffering since no entity (vastu or bhāva) of suffering is found],explaining what empty space is is what suffering refers to [as suffering is nothing but emptiness, and the referendum in question when explaining what is empty like space is the referendum of suffering].

de la 1) dga’ ba med pa’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to źes bya bas dga’ ba las bzlog pa’i don rnam par bstan te, sdug bsṅal ni dga’ ba las bzlog pa ste, gaṅ dga’ ba’am chags par ’gyur ba’i dṅos po med ciṅ de las bzlog pa’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to.2) dga’ ba zad pa’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to źes bya bas dga’ ba daṅ bral ba’i don bstan te, dga’ ba’i yul daṅ bral ba ni sdug bsṅal skye bas dga’ ba daṅ chags pa rnams daṅ bral ba’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to.3) smon pa med pa’i don ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to źes bya ba dga’ ba’i yul ma yin pa’i don bstan te, zag pa daṅ bcas pa’i chos thams cad ni sdug bsṅal rnam pa sna tshogs skye ba’i rgyu daṅ gźi yin pas de la smon ciṅ dga’ bar bya ba’i yul ma yin te, de ni sdug bsṅal gyi don to.4) sdug bsṅal gyi sgra rab tu bstan pa źes bya bas sgra tsam du zad pa’i don bstan te, sdug bsṅal źe’o źes bya ba’i sgras brjod pa ñid sdug bsṅal du zad kyi, sdug bsṅal gyi dṅos po gaṅ yaṅ med do źes bya ba’i don to.5) nam mkha’ rab tu brjod pa’i don ni źes bya bas raṅ bźin gyis stoṅ pa’i don bstan te, gaṅ stoṅ pa de ñid sdug bsṅal ba ste, nam mkha’ bźin du stoṅ par brjod pa’i don ñid sdug bsṅal ba’i don to.


’di ni sdug bsṅal gyi don ces bya’o.

ayaṃ duḥkhārthaḥ.

This is what ’suffering’ refers to.


de la bdag med pa’i don gaṅ źe na?

tatra katamo ’nātmārthaḥ?

3) What then does ’selflessness’ refer to?

chos thams cad kyi mtshan ñid śes pa’i dbaṅ du byas nas de la bdag med pa’i don gaṅ źe na źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs so – "With reference to the teaching on the one who knows the essential character of all moments of existence (sarvadharmalakṣaṇajñanirdeśam adhipatiṃ kṛtvā) it is said ...


bdag ni śin tu bdag med pa ste;gaṅ bdag med pa’i don de ni gsob bo, gsog go, ya ma brla’o, stoṅ pa’o.stoṅ pa’i don ni bdag med pa’i don te;

ātmātyantānātmā,yad anātmārthaṃ tad riktaṃ tucchaṃ vaśikaṃ śūnyam,śūnyārthas tv anātmārthaḥ.

The self [which is of two kinds, the one constructed (kalpita) by others, and the one appearing in connection with subject and object (grāhyagrāhaka), is without the true existence of a self (ātmabhāva) and thus] is absolutely selfless,what selflessness refers to is vain, meaningless, void and empty,and what emptiness refers to is what selflessness refers to.

bdag ni śin tu bdag med pa ste źes bya ba la bdag rnam pa gñis te, gźan gyis brtags pa daṅ, gzuṅ ba daṅ ’dzin par snaṅ ba’o; bdag de gñis la bdag gi dṅos po med pas na bdag med pa’o.gaṅ bdag med pa’i don de ni źes bya ba ni bdag rnam pa gñis med de stoṅ pa’i don de ni gsob bo źes bya ba la sogs par sbyar ro, sñiṅ po raṅ bźin med pa’i phyir gsob bo, śes rab kyi mig gis brtag mi bzod pa’i phyir gsog go, snaṅ ba tsam yaṅ rgyu rkyen la ltos pa’i phyir ya ma brla’o, ji ltar snaṅ ba kun yaṅ stoṅ pa yin pa’i phyir stoṅ pa’o.stoṅ pa’i don ni bdag med pa’i don źes bya ba la, de bas na bdag daṅ chos gñis kyis stoṅ pa’i don gaṅ yin pa de ñid bdag med pa’i don to.


’di ni bdag med pa’i don ces bya’o.

ayam ucyate ’nātmārthaḥ.

This is what ’selflessness’ refers to.


de la źi ba’i don gaṅ źe na?

tatra katamaḥ śāntārthaḥ?

4) What then does ’peaceful’ refer to

źi ba’i ṅa rgyal med pa’i dbaṅ du byas nas de la źi ba’i don gaṅ źe na źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs so – "With reference to the one free of conceit caused by peace (śāntinirmāṇam adhipatiṃ kṛtvā) it is said ...


źi ba ni źi bas źi bar mi ’gyur te, źi ba ñid źi ba’o;ma źi ba yaṅ źi bas źi bar mi ’gyur te.gaṅ źi ba’i don de ni mtshan ma thams cad ñe bar źi ba ste;’di ni źi ba źes bya’o.źi ba ni mya ṅan las ’das pa ste;

śāntaṃ na śāntyā śāntaṃ bhavati, śāntam eva śāntam,nāpy aśāntaṃ śāntyā śāntaṃ bhavati.yac chāntārthaṃ sā sarvanimittopaśāntir,idaṃ śāntam iti;śāntaṃ nirvāṇam.

The peaceful does not get peaceful by peace, the peaceful itself is peaceful [peaceful means empty (śūnya) or extinguished (nirvṛta), but it does not become peaceful or empty through knowledge of understanding an essence of peace (śāntasvabhāva) in emptiness or extinction, things are rather originally and from the beginning peaceful and empty (prakṛtyādiśāntaśūnya) ],and also the non-peaceful does not get peaceful by peace [the conditioned (saṃskṛta) things in existence do not become peaceful and non-existent after one has understood them as peaceful and empty through knowledge, they are from the beginning originally unborn and peaceful (ādiprakṛtyanutpannaśānta) ].What [the word (śabda) ] peaceful refers to is the allaying of distinguishing marks [like action (karma), vices (kleśa), subject and object (grāhyagrāhaka) ],this is peace;and [to teach the state of peacefulness (śāntabhāva):] the peaceful is extinction.

źi ba ni źi bas źi bar mi ’gyur te źi ba ñid źi ba’o źes bya ba la, źi ba źes bya ba ni stoṅ pa’am mya ṅan las ’das pa la bya ste, stoṅ pa’am mya ṅan las ’das pa’i de’i raṅ bźin źi bar rtog pa’i ye śes kyis źi ba daṅ stoṅ par byas pa ni ma yin gyi, ṅo bo ñid kyis ye nas źi źiṅ stoṅ pa’o źes bya ba’i don to.ma źi ba yaṅ źi bas źi bar mi ’gyur te źes bya ba ni ’khor ba’i chos ’dus byas kyi dṅos po de dag kyaṅ ye śes kyis źi ba daṅ stoṅ par rtogs nas źi źiṅ med par byas pa ni ma yin gyi, de dag kyaṅ ye nas ṅo bo ñid kyis ma skyes śiṅ źi ba’o źes bya ba’i don to.źi ba’o źes bya ba’i sgra’i don bstan pa’i phyir gaṅ źi ba’i don de ni mtshan ma thams cad ñe bar źi ba źes gsuṅs te, las daṅ ñon moṅs pa daṅ gzuṅ ba daṅ ’dzin pa’i mtshan ma thams cad źi ste, med pa de ni źi ba źes bya’o. źi ba dṅos po gaṅ yin pa bstan pa’i phyir źi ba ni mya ṅan las ’das pa źes gsuṅs te, ñon moṅs pa daṅ phuṅ po spaṅs pa’i mya ṅan las ’das pa ste źi ba’o.


’di ni źi ba’i don ces bya’o.

ayam ucyate śāntārthaḥ.

This is what ’peaceful’ refers to.


btsun pa śa ra dva ti’i bu, ’di dag ni byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi chos kyi mdo bźi mi zad pa’o.

ime, bhadanta śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvānām akṣayāṇi dharmoddānāni.

These, reverend Śāradvatīputra, are the bodhisattvas’ four imperishable summaries of religion.

chos kyi mdo bźi mi zad pa bśad zin to.


