79th akṣaya: Ekāyano Mārgaḥ

79th Imperishable: The Way Traversed Alone.


btsun pa śa ra dva ti’i bu, gźan yaṅ byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam mi zad pa yin te.

punar aparaṃ, bhadanta śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvānām ekāyano mārgo ’py akṣayaḥ.

Further, reverend Śāradvatīputra, the bodhisattvas’ way traversed alone is also imperishable.

lhun gyis grub pa’i byaṅ chub sems dpa’ bstan pa’i phyir btsun pa śa ra dva ti’i bu gźan yaṅ byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam mi zad yin te źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs te, ’dis bsdus pa’i don raṅ byaṅ chub pa bstan to – "To teach what the bodhisattva employing no effort (anābhoga) is it is said: .... The title summarizing it (piṇḍārtha) is taught as Isolated Awakening (pratyekabodhi)." The title of this section in ṭ., Pratyekabodhi, does not seem appropriate, because this section too is in fact characterized by the bodhisattva morality – unless the argument is that the bodhisattva’s pratyekabodhi is at issue, not the ordinary pratyekabodhi.
gźan la mi ltos par bdag gcig pus bla na med pa’i byaṅ chub thob par byed pa ni gcig pus bgrod pa ste, gaṅ de ltar byed pa ñid lam yin no.
mi zad pa yaṅ bgrod ciṅ thob par bya ba’i chos mi zad pa’i phyir bgrod par byed pa daṅ thob par byed pa yaṅ mi zad pa’o – "It is imperishable: since the moments of existence to be traversed and attained are imperishable, the traversing and attaining are also imperishable."
lhun gyis grub pa’i byaṅ chub sems dpa’ yaṅ rnam pa bźi ste, 1) mi g-yeṅ ba daṅ, 2) bzod pa thob pa daṅ, 3) mñam pa ñid la gnas pa daṅ, 4) sgrib pa med pa’o – "The bodhisattva employing no effort is of four kinds: 1) undisturbed (avikṣipta), 2) having attained tolerance (kṣāntiprāpta), 3) staying in sameness (samatāsthita), and 4) without hindrances (nirāvaraṇa).


de la gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam gaṅ źe na?

tatra katama ekāyano mārgaḥ?

What then is the way traversed alone?


gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam la byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams gźan gyi driṅ la mi ’jog pa yin te;gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam źes bya ba nibyaṅ chub sems dpa’ gcig pu gñis ma yin źiṅ, grogs med par bla na med pa yaṅ dag par rdzogs pa’i byaṅ chub tu go cha gyon te;bdag gi brtson ’grus daṅ, mthu daṅ, stobs kyis yoṅs su bzuṅ ba’i lhag pa’i bsam pas gźan gyi go skabs med par bdag ñid byed ciṅ bdag gi mthu stobs kyis ’phags te, des de lta bu’i go cha sra ba bgos nas:sems can thams cad kyis yoṅs su thob par bya ba gaṅ ci yod pa, de dag thams cad bdag gis yoṅs su thob par bya’o;gaṅ ’phags pa thams cad daṅ theg pa la gsar du źugs pa’i byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyis thob par bya ba la, de bdag gis yoṅs su thob par bya’o.

ekāyane mārge bodhisattvā aparapratyayāḥ.ekāyano mārga ity:eko bodhisattvo ’dvitīyo ’sahāyo ’nuttarāyāṃ samyaksaṃbodhau saṃnāhaṃ saṃnahyati.svavīryānubhavabalaparigṛhītenādhyāśayenāparāvakāśasvayaṃkārī svabalabalodgataḥ sa evaṃ dṛḍhasaṃnāhaṃ saṃnaddho:yat kiṃcit sarvasattvānāṃ pariprāpayitavyaṃ bhaviṣyati, tad ahaṃ pariprāpayiṣyāmiyat sarvāryāḥ sarvanavayānasaṃprasthitā bodhisattvāḥ pariprāpayiṣyanti tad ahaṃ pariprāpayiṣyāmi.

On the way traversed alone the bodhisattvas are not dependent on any other.The way traversed alone [which is the one way (ekayāna), is as follows]:alone, without a second, without a companion, the bodhisattva puts on armour [producing the thought of incomparable awakening he acts with vigour (vīrya) ] for the sake of incomparable complete awakening.With determination in which his own vigour, strength and power are included, beyond situations created by others, autonomous, he distinguishes himself in power by his own power, thus he is armoured in strong armour:“Whatever living beings will attain, that I will attain;what all the holy ones and all the bodhisattvas who have recently entered the way will attain, that I will attain.

de la mi g-yeṅ ba ni ’jig rten las ’das pa daṅ ’jig rten pa’i yon tan rnams bdag ’ba’ źig gis thob par bya ba’i phyir rtsom pa ste, de’i dbaṅ du byas nas gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam la źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs so – "The undisturbed one (1) (avikṣipta) is the one who strives to attain transcendent and worldly qualities (lokottaralaukikaguṇa) only for himself, with reference to him (tam adhipatiṃ kṛtvā) it is said ..."gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam ni theg pa gcig pa’i lam ste, lam de bsgrub par bya ba la byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams gźan su la yaṅ mi rten par bdag gcig pus sgrub par byed pa’o. theg pa gcig gi lam dṅos gaṅ yin pa bstan pa’i phyir gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs so.byaṅ chub tu go cha gyon ces bya ba ni bla na med pa’i byaṅ chub thob par bya ba’i phyir byaṅ chub tu sems bskyed ciṅ brtson ’grus rtsom ste źes bya ba’i don to.bdag gi brtson ’grus ni dge ba byed pa la sems spro ba’o; mthu ni bdud la sogs pas bar chad byed mi nus pa’o; stobs ni le los mi tshugs pa’o; gźan gyi go skabs med pa źes bya ba ni gźan gyis grogs bya mi dgos par źes bya ba’i don to; bdag gi mthu stobs kyis ’phags pa źes bya ba ni bdag gi mthus ’byuṅ źiṅ kun la khyad źugs par bya ste źes bya ba’i don to.sems can thams cad kyis yoṅs su thob par bya ba ni gaṅ rig pa’i gnas daṅ, bzo’i gnas daṅ, loṅs spyod la sogs pa’o; gaṅ ’phags pa thams cad daṅ źes bya ba ni ñan thos daṅ, raṅ saṅs rgyas daṅ, byaṅ chub sems dpa’ sa la źugs pa daṅ, de bźin gśegs pa dag go; theg pa la gsar du źugs pa ni daṅ po ñid du byaṅ chub tu sems bskyed pa’am, mos pas spyod pa’i sa la źugs pa’i byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams so; thob par bya ba ni de dag gis thob par bya ba’i yon tan dran pa ñe bar gźag pa daṅ yaṅ dag pa’i spoṅ ba la sogs pa byaṅ chub kyi phyogs kyi chos sum cu rtsa bdun daṅ, sa daṅ pha rol tu phyin pa daṅ, stobs daṅ mi ’jigs pa la sogs pa’o.


sbyin pa ni bdag gi grogs ma yin gyi, bdag ni sbyin pa’i grogs so;tshul khrims daṅ, bzod pa daṅ, brtson ’grus daṅ, bsam gtan daṅ, śes rab ni bdag gi grogs ma yin gyi, bdag ni tshul khrims daṅ, bzod pa daṅ, brtson ’grus daṅ, bsam gtan daṅ, śes rab kyi grogs so;

na mama dānaṃ sahāyakam, ahaṃ punar dānasya sahāyah;na mama śīlakṣāntivīryadhyānaprajñāḥ sahāyakā, ahaṃ punaḥ śīlakṣāntivīryadhyānaprajñānāṃ sahāyaḥ;

Generosity is not my companion, I am rather the companion of generosity;morality, tolerance, vigour, meditation and insight are not my companions, I am rather the companion of morality, tolerance, vigour, meditation and insight;

bzod pa thob pa ni bdag ñid kyis pha rol tu phyin pa rnams yoṅs su sbyoṅ bar byed pa ste, de’i dbaṅ du byas nas sbyin pa ni bdag gi grogs ma yin gyi źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs so. de’i don ni pha rol tu phyin pa de dag gis bdag bsgrub ciṅ las su ruṅ bar bya ba ma yin gyi, bdag gis de dag bsgrub ciṅ mthar dbyuṅ bar bya’o źes bya ba’i don to – "The one who has attained tolerance (2) (kṣāntiprāpta) is the one purifying the perfections himself (ātmaiva pāramitāpariśodhakaḥ); with reference to him (tam adhipatiṃ kṛtvā) it is said ...


bdag la ni pha rol tu phyin pa rnams kyis rim gro mi bya’i, bdag gis ni pha rol tu phyin pa rnams la rim gro bya’o;bdag la ni bsdu ba’i dṅos po rnams kyis rim gror mi bya’i, bdag gis ni bsdu ba’i dṅos po rnams la rim gro bya’o;bdag la ni dge ba’i rtsa ba thams cad kyis rim gror mi bya’i, bdag gis ni dge ba’i rtsa ba thams cad la rim gror bya’o;

nāhaṃ pāramitābhir upasthātavyo mayā punaḥ pāramitā upasthātavyāḥ.nāhaṃ saṃgrahavastubhir upasthātavyo, mayā punaḥ saṃgrahavastūny upasthātavyāni;nāhaṃ sarvakuśalamūlair upasthātavyo, mayā punaḥ sarvakuśalamūlāny upasthātavyāni.

I am not to be served by the perfections, the perfections are rather to be served by me.I am not to be served by the means of attraction, the means of attraction are rather to be served by me;I am not to be served by all the good moments of existence, all the good moments of existence are rather to be served by me.

mñam pa ñid la gnas pa ni sems can thams cad yoṅs su smin par byed pa’i chos bsdu ba’i dṅos po rnams bsgrubs pa ste, de’i dbaṅ du byas nas bdag la bsdu ba’i dṅos po rnams kyis źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs te, de dag gi don kyaṅ sṅa ma bźin du lta’o – "The one staying in sameness (3) (samatāsthita) is the one attaining the moments of existence which are the means of attraction (saṃgrahavastu) to mature all living beings (sarvasattvaparipāka); with reference to him (tam adhipatiṃ kṛtvā) it is said ...
Cf. supra.


gaṅ ’di lta bu’i chos la grogs med par bdag ñid byed ciṅ gźan gyi go skabs med par bdag gcig pu gñis ma yin źiṅ grogs med par rdo rje sa’i sñiṅ po la ’dug ste, bdud stobs daṅ bcas pa rnams btul la sems kyi skad cig gcig daṅ ldan pa’i śes rab kyis bla na med pa yaṅ dag par rdzogs pa’i byaṅ chub mṅon par rdzogs par ’tshaṅ rgya bar bya’o,sñam la de yaṅ mṅon par rdzogs par ’tshaṅ rgya ba,

yeṣu evaṃdharmeṣv asahāyasvayaṃkāryaparāvakāśena ekākinā mayādvitīyenāsahāyena vajramaye mahīmaṇḍale sthitena sabalaṃ savāhanaṃ māraṃ dharṣayitvaikacittakṣaṇasamāyuktayā prajñayānuttarā samyaksaṃbodhir abhisaṃboddhavyā.iti so ’bhisaṃbudhyate.

By the said moments of existence I will wake up to the incomparable complete awakening by insight [which is knowledge free of thought-construction (nirvikalpajñāna) ] connected to the moment of thought [when reaching awakening], without a companion, autonomous, beyond situations created by others, alone, without a second, established without a companion on the adamantine place on earth, having subdued the Evil One with his forces and army.Thus he wakes up.

sgrib pa med pa ni bdag gcig pus bla na med pa’i byaṅ chub thob pa’i bar du gcod pa’i bgegs rnams ’joms pa ste, de’i dbaṅ du byas nas gaṅ ’di lta bu’i chos la grogs med par źes bya ba la sogs pa gsuṅs so. ’di lta bu’i chos ni goṅ du bśad pa’i ’jig rten pa’i yon tan daṅ, ’jig rten las ’das pa’i yon tan daṅ, pha rol tu phyin pa daṅ, bsdu ba’i dṅos po la sogs pa daṅ ’og nas ’byuṅ ba bla na med pa’i byaṅ chub tu ’tshaṅ rgya ba’i chos rnams so. śes rab kyis źes bya ba ni rnam par mi rtog pa’i ye śes so – "The one free of hindrances (4) (nirāvaraṇa) is the one vanquishing the hindrances for the personal attainment of the incomparable awakening; with reference to him (tam adhipatiṃ kṛtvā) it is said ...


de ni, btsun pa śa ra dva ti’i bu, byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rnams kyi gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam mi zad pa źes bya’o.

asāv ucyate, bhadanta śāradvatīputra, bodhisattvānām akṣaya ekāyano mārgaḥ.

This, reverend Śāradvatīputra, is called the bodhisattvas’ imperishable way traversed alone.

gcig pu bgrod pa’i lam mi zad pa bśad zin to.


